Uh, thank you for the welcome.
I'd like to introduce my colleagues who are with me today.
Belinda Chin and Patima Navar,
who are Deputy Chief Executives in the
ministry, alongside myself.
Uh, flour Murray, one of the other Deputy chief executives,
was unwell today, was unable to attend, uh,
new Zealand's ethnic committees.
Continue to grow in size, complexity, and contribution.
And now entering our fifth year,
the ministry is at a pivotal point in our
organizational maturity.
That's something that's very much on our minds.
Uh, we've done a lot over the past four years, uh,
but are changing international
and local context means there's much more that needs
to be done, and some of it has, uh, not been planned
this year, has tested our resilience.
A range of developments,
including the conflict in the Middle East,
have impacted ethnic communities in our country.
There's been felt very deeply amongst many people.
We've seen rising racism
and polarization as we do our part in supporting communities
to be cohesive in the face of adversity.
We've also operated in an environment of fiscal constraint
with cost saving, uh, saving imperatives
and uncertainty around our organizational form.
Uh, being in the environment, we've continued
to be focused on being efficient
and impactful, delivering value for money
and outcomes that matter.
Despite these challenges, uh, we've had
to be very deliberate about choices.
Given what I just shared, we've put our energy into
what communities need
and what government requires from us as a system leader.
And I believe our annual report reflects this balance
of ambition, uh, and pragmatism.
Uh, our key achievements include the include releasing our
ethnic evidence report last year.
We know that the report will only produce outcomes
if people know about it and actively use it.
Over the past year, we ran 15 sessions
for government agencies,
and the report has had over 5,000 views online.
Uh, it's now informing cross-agency work,
and very importantly,
and pleasingly, we see communities citing it
for their work as well.
Uh, in times of, uh, community polarization
where it continues to be a threat to social cohesion,
we've encouraged people to come together to network
and solve problems collaboratively.
So, for example, we worked with both the Jewish
and Muslim, uh, the peak organizations
to facilitate the signing of, of a harmony accord.
And more broadly, we have two major conferences in Auckland.
Over the year, uh, there's been a high demand
for people saying to the ministry they'd like
us to bring people together.
So the first conference was ethnic exchange, supported
by private sector sponsors
and others, uh, brought together over 300, uh, attendees,
including business council, uh, councils, economic agencies,
and so on, to highlight economic potential
of ethnic entrepreneurs and to connect them with trade
and investment, uh, partners.
Uh, this year I'm pleased to say that due to strong demand,
we're holding a second conference next Friday, uh, uh,
almost entirely, uh, funded by sponsors
demonstrating the demand for, for the conference itself.
Another conference, ethnic Advantage
convened over 300 representatives from ethnic organizations
to tackle pressing issues like social cohesion,
foreign interference, uh, interference,
and emergency preparedness,
all very critical in today's environment,
very current issues.
Uh, we continue to reduce community vulnerability
to foreign interference.
Our security and resilience team has produced, uh, uh,
15 resources, mo 13 resources, I beg your pardon.
Uh, most of which are in 30 languages
to help communities understand
and resist foreign interference.
Uh, there's also been an unprecedented demand on our ethnic
communities development fund.
Uh, the fund supports grassroots initiatives
that build cohesion and community capability.
This year, we received
and processed a record of $30 million worth of applications
for the small fund of $4.2 million.
408 grants were awarded up from 306 last year.
Uh, we are learning to do more with less
as our organization matures frequently, partnering
with others to get our job done while staying
true to our core purpose.
Um, we are committed to growing the wellbeing
of all New Zealanders by the interventions I've described.
We believe every New Zealander benefits when ethnic
communities full potential is realized.
And this is our organizational mantra,
and this is what puts the sales in the, uh, wind, the sales
of everyone in the ministry for ethnic communities.
Thank you. Oh, thank ra. Um, first
Question was Morris.
Uh, thank you Chair. Um, thank you for coming here.
I do want to congratulate for the Harmony Accord.
Uh, I think that was a excellent sort of organization
by the Ministry of Ethnic Communities.
Thank you. Um, I wanna just focus, I guess a couple
of questions on your strategic intention,
and particularly the four priorities.
And I wanna first pick up on priority one,
which is promoting the value of diversity.
And, but you mentioned cohesion a number of times.
What does cohesion mean?
Um, there's numerous definitions for social cohesion.
Uh, but I think there's general acceptance.
There are certain elements such as sense of belonging, uh,
equity, uh, participation in the community, uh, willingness
to develop social capital, collaborate
with others in the community.
So these are some of the things
that we are focused on in relation to cohesion.
I think that's great. And I just wanna follow up on that.
When it comes to that, how is the Ministry
of Ethic community is going
to address the ho marginalization of the ethnic communities?
So, for example, I am from,
if I'm in China, I never refer
to myself as being from China.
Mm-hmm. You know, when we talk about Asians in ot,
or you're looking at one half of the global population.
So, so we are seeing continuously data
being used to say like, this is Pan-Asian, but it's like,
but that's half the global population.
Mm-hmm. Is there any move by the ministry
of other communities, start actually unpacking things
into more regional basis that actually does that?
'cause that's the, the thing is cohesion could also
potentially inadvertently contribute to homogenization.
Yes. So how would that then, how would you balance the two?
I think, uh, firstly, it's important
that we do have disaggregated data ethic communities.
For many years, people have been saying exactly
what you said, uh, that we are being classified
as Asian rather than Filipino
and Korean, that kind of thing.
So in our ethnic evidence report,
we've been working very hard with statistics New Zealand
to make sure that we disaggregate that data
so New Zealanders have a better picture
of the diversity within these clusterings of communities
that people have been accustomed to.
Having said that, we also encourage communities
to look at themselves as Kiwi Chinese, Kiwi, Korean, uh, so
that they feel they belong in New Zealand while they retain
their, their identity for where they come from.
Okay. I have a, I have a supplementary on that.
I What do you mean by Kiwi New Zealand?
Because I think for, for me, that comes down
to assimilation.
Mm. Right. So what are you saying is, is the ministry
asking people from my communities to assimilate as opposed,
so how would the, how would you balance then assimilation
and being able to be proud about their own culture
and be able to be in a place where I can be proud
to say that I am Chinese.
I live in New Zealand, I'm, I have an understanding
of ERO in New Zealand. Oh,
Sorry. We, we do need to
have some other questions
to, if you, if you wanna quickly
Answer that, I'll answer that as quickly as I can.
We do not believe in assimilation.
We believe in people retaining their cultural identity,
what matters them, their heritage languages and so on.
However, at the same time, we want people
to be invested in being here in New Zealand.
So what that means is participating in the,
in volunteer work, participating in the political processes,
making submissions, recognizing that they're essential part
of, uh, crafting the fabric
of New Zealand together with everyone else here.
So that's kind of what we do,
rather than making everybody assimilate as such.
Thank you. Thank you. That's helpful. Um, Jenny
Kda. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Kda move, and, um, welcome to you and your team. Thank you.
And March of 2024,
public Service Commission made recommendations, uh,
suggesting that, uh, agencies be merged.
Yes. Um, agencies with a hundred staff
or less, uh, should be merged.
So my question is, what discussions, if any, have you had
with the public service, uh, commission
or your minister, uh, about this potential closure
of the Ministry of Ethnic Communities to merge it
with other agencies?
Um, we have had a number of conversations
with the Public Service Commission on the potential
amalgamation of the ministry alongside other
population agencies.
Um, we understand the, the challenges
that the Public Service Commission was trying
to address in view
of the larger operating model for the public service.
Things like fragmentation of advice into the system, uh,
communities being able to access single points
of service rather than multiple, reducing back office costs,
those sorts of things.
Um, we have had conversations
with the Public Service Commission individually as agencies,
as well as collectively as population agencies.
Um, I've been very clear about the fact that I,
I believe ethnic committees have, uh, advocated
for the establishment of a ministry for almost 26 years.
So it'll be deeply felt, whatever, you know,
form the ministry takes in the future will
be deeply felt by them.
We highlighted the Royal Commission's recommendation
that there should be an agency of some kind
to raise issues related to ethnic diversity
and social cohesion.
Um, and we reminded, uh, the Public Service Commission
and other officials of the importance
of engaging with communities.
So we have social license to operate whatever form we take.
Um, our advice was what you'd expect of officials,
generally a range of options
of which we did not put our penny down
for any one particular one.
Uh, we, we said
that we could continue working the way we are
and addressing some of those concerns that were, you know,
raised with us, uh, in our current form.
So, for example, example, better collaboration across
agencies and particular areas like the
nomination service and so on.
Um, we also, uh, suggested that there could be other things
that could be done that's within the Public Service Act
already, the establishment of departmental agencies,
for example, that share back office functions
and other such, uh, setups.
Um, but we said the key thing, whatever form the,
the minister or the Public Service Commission was advocating
for, that, the centrality
of committee voice must be the most important thing.
That, that is what whatever form the
ministry takes or does not.
That has to be the central focus
of the rearrangement. If you like, you like
Supplementary.
Um, so the Ministry
of Ethnic Communities serves about 1.1 million people in art
Total New Zealand, uh, right now.
And it has estimated that it will grow to about a third
of our total population by 2048.
So, can you explain or justify what it's a good idea
to downgrade the advocacy
and the work that you do with other agencies?
Um, when you're representing the fastest growing population
in our country, how will this improve the outcomes
for the fastest growing population
in New Zealand in the future?
And this is, you would know this well, Marvin,
because you were in the Department of Internal Affairs
before becoming, um, chief Executive of Ministry
of Ethnic Communities.
We've been in this position already, office
of Ethnic Communities,
was within the Department of Internal Affairs.
How much different would it be in the future
to actually have you closed down
and merged with a bigger ministry?
Um, I think, um, it's fair to say that one
of the questions that was on the table is,
does it make a difference
to have a chief executive and or not?
Um, my, my position was it does make a difference. Mm-hmm.
However, we remain open to different options as long
as the voice of committees is at the,
the top table of government.
Um, having said that, we did not advocate
for any particular way of, uh, organizing ourselves.
We only gave, uh, pros and cons to each option. Suggested
Last Ametri. Has
the Minister given you his assurance
that there will be a long-term future
for the Ministry of Ethnic Communities?
Um, I've had very little conversation with the minister
directly about the amalgamation proposal.
Uh, the Public Service Commission did that independently.
In fact, I excused myself from those meetings
to enable a robust conversation to be had.
'cause obviously, you know, my job's also in
discussion and manner of speaking.
So I allowed those conversations to take place.
And, uh, we, we just heard that the government announced
publicly that there will be no amalgamation
for this term of government.
Thank you. Um, lovely to see all three of you again.
Um, I've got a line of questioning
around the foreign interference work
that the ministry has been involved in.
Um, you've mentioned that in your report, in your, um, uh,
introductory remarks today, uh, from memory,
it was about 2.2 million per year for four years.
Um, I have seen the resources
that the ministry has produced.
Um, can you give us a bit of an update as to where
that's at, how much money's been spent, what's left,
and what are the next steps?
Certainly, I'll ask Patima too.
Um, thank you for the opportunity
to speak about the Foreign Interference
Work program at the Ministry run.
So we do have to 0.25 million.
We tend to spend all of that 2.25 million every year.
Um, we are incredibly proud of the resources
that we have put up online.
Um, we have taken very much a nuanced approach to
what is it that we put up.
What we have done so far is we've put up
foundational resources.
So that tells our communities what foreign interferences,
what their rights in New Zealand are.
The second thing we've done is bring life to
what is actually happening on the ground.
So we put forward real life examples, case studies,
which means that it allows our communities
and especially our community leaders to join the dots
and understand what it might look like if they were
facing interference.
Um, the third thing
that we have been looking at is working directly
with our community leaders.
A lot of our community leaders run NG organizations
or community organizations.
And our leaders need to be empowered to be able
to withstand identify and foreign interference
and working specifically with some of our leaders.
And some of those research are coming up, um, that the,
the fourth thing that we have done is when we hear from our
communities about what it is it
that our people face on the ground,
those insights must be captured,
and those insights must be taken back into the center.
So for other agencies
who work on foreign interference can also design
interference and support systems.
So we have been creating insights reports from
what we've heard, evidence-based insights reports,
and we have been sharing that
with other central government agencies.
And so what we hope to do next year is
to create a community hub online,
which would be a one stop shop
that would bring together a whole range of tools
and initiatives on the website
that allows people direct access to resources.
Well, thank you. Uh, what would some of those tools be?
Because resources aren't tools. I, I get that.
This is the, the, the basics. Yeah.
So information around what it is and how to identify it.
Um, that program was meant to change behavior, ultimately
to build resilience within communities.
And then the information sharing within public
sector agencies piece.
I'm interested to hear a little bit about what are,
what are those next steps when it comes to
behavior change and tools?
So if I can give you an example of one
of the tools that we are working on.
Uh, community leaders have said
to us when they run organizations, they would like
to bake an understanding about foreign interference into
their governance structures,
the auditing structures, X, Y, and Z.
So one of the tools we are working on is,
if you were a community leader setting up an organization,
what in your constitution, what do you need to say
in your risk and assurance procedures?
What do you need to say?
So the tool will be modules
that a community leader can pick up when they're running an
organization and kind of go, these, this is
what good looks like.
So that means when
that community organization governance leadership comes
together, that behavior
or the culture of foreign interference is part
and parcel of that organization.
So that's the way we are looking at in terms
of behavioral changes in, um, leaders.
The second thing that we have been talking about,
and this is something we've been talking at in, um, um,
ethnic advantage.
So broad engagement is one
of the big behavior changes is people don't really like
to talk about foreign interference.
You know, it is so much safer
to leave foreign interference in the shadows
because it's a hard topic to talk about.
And then in the shadows, it just continues to grow.
So one of the behavior changes we are looking
for is shine sunlight on it,
not just government shining sunlight on it,
but communities themselves shining sunlight on that issue
and bringing it out in the open.
How can you create trusted,
safe environments within community organizations,
within communities themselves,
where leaders are upfront talking about it?
So some of the things in terms of behavioral changes,
that is what we are thinking about. Okay,
Fine, fine. Eth
um, have you, have you got the assurance
that the 2.25 million per year for four years will remain,
and that you don't need to cut any of that money
to return to the center when,
Um, at this stage, the, the, the fund is finite.
I think it remains to be seen whether the fund
will be expanded beyond.
Um, we are determined
to do the best job we can within
the finite money that we've got.
But it appears to me at least
that the foreign interference is not a phenomenon,
just disappear at the end of the, the funding.
It, it'll depend on the government where they wish to put
that funding to continue that work. Thank
You. The supplementary
on that, could you just give us a
summary, um, for those watching?
What, uh, how you define foreign
interference for your communities?
Um, you know, there, there is a definition that, you know,
the N-Z-S-I-S uses at, and it's a very good definition,
but the way we talk
to our communities about foreign interference
is slightly different.
For one key reason.
It's because you can stigmatize communities when you
talk about foreign interference.
So the line that we always take is
that ethnic communities are the first line
of defense against foreign interference.
So what they do is about empowering the rest of the country.
It is not about vulnerable communities
that need government support.
It is about powerful, strong, empowered communities
who are acting as the first line
of defense against foreign interference for this country.
In fact, the, the work that Pima just described,
where we see communities as an asset
for combating foreign interference rather than a risk
and a threat has been extracted international attention from
other jurisdictions that see the line we are taking as one
that actually is robust and helpful.
So very pleased about that.
Uh, but chair, I can say a lot of committees, when we meet
with them on the ground, they are very concerned about the
very definition issue you've raised.
So they say, we're getting money from, you know,
a foreign state to preserve Cantonese
or whatever languages they speak.
Is that okay? Kind of thing.
And we have to explain to them the definition is this,
it involves coercion.
It's not some of the other
activities you might be concerned about.
So as pratima saying,
legitimizing the conversation is really critical,
allowing committees to talk about it
and raise these questions openly without, uh,
a sense of threat to themselves.
I, if I may add that, you know,
the definition very much is
that it's foreign interference is an act by a foreign state
very much through a proxy
or a co-opt here in New Zealand, um, intended
to influence, disrupt, subvert new Zealand's interests.
So it's very much through corruptive,
disruptive coercive means of very,
very nefarious activities are
the things that we are talking about.
But our communities are very much our first line
of defense against those nefarious activities.
And do, do you have examples that you're able
to talk to your communities about?
About yeah. What the difference say
between influence and interferences
And, and that's where the case studies
that I mentioned earlier becomes really, really important
because you can talk about it in very theoretical,
figurative terms, but real life examples of
what people are experiencing here in New Zealand,
those make a real difference.
And last, last question from you on this topic is, um,
the, what, what are you hearing from your communities about,
um, the, the, um, I guess in person aspects
of foreign interference
and digital, um, aspects of foreign interference or,
or potential foreign interference?
When we, to be blunt, we walk into people's homes,
we sit on their couches where they tell you some really,
really deeply personal stories about
how it affects foreign interference,
whether it's happening personally
or through your phone, it doesn't really matter.
The, the effect, the impact, the personal effect
of it is weighing on people's minds.
We have stories of where, um, community members, um,
family members send their young children away when they're
talking to us, because that they don't want children to hear
what the parents are facing.
Well, thank you for, thanks for that. Um, Paul,
Um, good morning. I
just wanted to, uh, get in there and, and,
and commend you for all the work that you do.
And I get a lot of, uh, good feedback,
especially from the community that I belong to.
Um, I, I just wanted to ask, uh, given the success
of the, for example, business symposium
and all the other work that you do, which is clearly, um,
well deep engagement into the communities.
Um, I think the, I think that there is a, uh,
a need to, um, make the results
of those engagements, um,
clear and and defined.
Uh, I think that there is an opportunity lost
where the good work that you're doing, um, isn't able to be
tracked in terms of outcome.
Um, because I get good feedback
and everyone's excited for the next one, you know,
uh, do we track that?
And, and can, can, can the ministry, uh,
establish a base of, of reporting
that enables people like us, um, not to have
to hear it from our own communities,
but to get it in the form that's easy to, um, go through.
Thank you for the question.
Uh, that is something that's on our minds.
Uh, now that we are going into our fifth year
of maturity in the ministry, a lot
of the base work has been done.
We are beginning to look at how we establish performance
measures that hold us to account
for the investment made in the ministry
for getting outcomes for communities.
Um, there are some challenges in this space.
Number one, we're a small agency
that heavily depends on our influence on other agencies like
MB n zt, ministry for Social Development
and so on to do what they are supposed to do.
Uh, so that's one challenge.
Uh, we have no legislation or mandate
or targets that we can hang our hat on.
We just have to use our influenced evidence
and data to persuade people across
the line to do what is right.
The other thing is, um, attribution.
So for example, if there's more volunteering participation
by ethnic communities, is
that the ministry's work in social media?
If there's increased vaccination rates,
because we've put out stuff on social media.
Is it us? Is it TU or, uh, health New Zealand?
These things are challenging.
Nevertheless, we will be working as a team
with the Oag G support to establish some measures linked
to our four priorities.
So it's a little bit clearer what we are delivering
and what, uh, results we're getting for the investment need.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
Well, that was my question.
I do have a couple of subs on that one.
Um, so you mentioned the other agents,
other ministries that you work across.
Can you give us, um, a couple of examples of how
the information and the advice that you've
provided to other ministries, how that's actually manifest?
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
And as a follow up, uh, to palo's question, um,
how you developing those, um, strategic plans
to help deliver a measure for the outcomes?
And I think I've asked this question
before, um, in former reviews, is, yeah.
How do you plan to measure the performance
of the ministry in terms of the
outcomes for people on the grant?
Um, so to answer the first question around
how do we know whether what we're doing is making a
difference to the work of other agencies, uh,
we were very pleased to see that, for example,
with ethnic evidence, our report last year, uh,
we made transparent something
that communities have been telling us for a while.
So, uh, there was the African community leaders,
I think early last year who said, you know,
if the ministry wants to meet
with African committees in a quick, prompt, efficient way,
go to African, uh, funerals for suicide,
we've got a high number of those occurring.
That was quite an alarming thing to hear.
Uh, our ethnic evidence report highlighted
that this is in fact true for the MAH community.
They have high, uh, levels of suicide in the,
uh, in the youth community.
Uh, so that data was presented, the report.
And, uh, we are pleased to see, uh, that the, uh,
national Suicide Action Prevention plan now alludes uses the
data as, you know, as part of the, the plan.
Uh, and also very pleasingly. We see communities citing it.
So just the other day, we were delighted
to see on social media, a community leaders saying,
I read this data on suicide, and, uh, this is unacceptable.
We're gonna set up a, a youth group to discuss issues
that bring people together, improve their mental health.
So we see those things.
We don't track them as such at the moment.
We do keep an eye on whether the evidence report,
for example, is getting legs the way I just described.
Uh, another example was Ministry
of Social Development in relation
to their social cohesion report,
cited the ethnic evidence report and some of the data.
And New Zealand police have said,
can you please carry on producing these reports
because we rely on the data you're producing.
So we are in here for the long game.
Some of these changes to social cohesion, inclusion,
wellbeing, they're very difficult to measure.
Uh, but they can be over a long period of time.
So, uh, that, that's what we are applying our minds to.
Um, we are still in our initial, uh, thinking
around performance measures related to our four priorities.
That is something we'll be working on
with the OEG very shortly.
Good to hear. Okay.
Um, I, I made some notes on your opening statements,
and I wanted to just list, trying
to tie certain things together, like, um,
like the rising racism, um, uh, fiscal restraints.
And, uh, and then we talked,
you talked about social connection, social cohesion.
I like the social connection
with your culture fully intact, those ideas.
Um, and, and then,
and then along comes the foreign interference piece, which
all of those statements are big things to say.
'cause they're big things to address.
And so I'm just actually, um,
big and concerning and current and risk.
And then you take us into the discussion of the meau
and how they are experiencing, uh, uh, death by suicide.
Um, that's a, that just, that just took me to another level.
Can I just say, but importantly, so,
um, what do I want to ask?
I wanna ask, what, um, if you were to have to decide
what were the next two things that you would do,
what would you primarily merely focus on?
I note the harmony, accord,
and all of the, the resource development and, and,
and sitting on couches.
See, that's, that all that's helpful for us to know
so we can see where the work is going on.
It's critical for us to know so we can do our job
to help you do more of that.
Well, thank you. Um, I mean,
I don't mean this to be a sort of like a flippant question,
but what would you, what would be your next two priorities
to do more and do better?
Um, you, 'cause you need more cash.
I mean, you need more, you know, fiscal, what is it?
Fiscal, um, restraint. It's funny. That's yank enough bucks.
So, so I, uh, again, big issue, serious issues,
current issues, um, need resource
and the ability to do more. What would you do more
Of? I think, uh, there
there are, there's a breadth of things
that come out, ministry's doors every day.
Sure. We have to be very strategic what we choose. Mm-hmm.
Uh, that's a very sharp question.
And I think what I would say about
that is we are seeing rising racism,
polarization in communities, fueled by social media
and o other influences from abroad.
Um, overseas issues are playing out right here in
New Zealand and issues, political, religious,
whatever issues overseas are playing out right here.
And with the changing demographics that was described
before, uh, this has potential profound implications
for social cohesion.
So I think communities need more support on how
to hang together, despite our differences.
And in our observation as a ministry, uh,
people often confront the easy bit of, uh,
having a diverse population, the benefits of it, and so on.
And those things are absolutely correct.
However, the darker more challenging side,
if we have differences based on our religious values
or politics overseas, how do we tackle those things?
Uh, which is why for us,
the harmony accord was a hugely symbolic, important thing
to say in one of the deepest conflicts in the world
that's playing out right here in New Zealand communities,
the Jewish and Muslim commun can still come together,
break bread, have dialogue respectfully
and back to defer whatever the opinions are on
Gaza and Israel and so on.
So that for us, is an exemplar.
We are deeply grateful to those communities
for paving the way to say, this is how you could do it.
So that's one area. Cohesion, racism, polarization,
how we bring people together and keep them together.
So New Zealand retains is brand is one
of the most peaceful countries in the world.
So that's one thing.
And the other one is economic empowerment.
We know people are struggling.
It's like, no surprise, a lot
of businesses are facing major challenges.
Um, and we can see a tide
of anti migrant sentiment rising
in other parts of the globe.
And actually people tend to scapegoat somewhat. Mm-hmm.
Or the some committee, and
that is potentially gonna come here as well, hasn't quite,
but our indications on social media is it could,
so economic empowerment is really critical.
Uh, we have, uh, commissioned a supporter, two reports
on the contributions of ethnic, uh, people
to New Zealand's economy.
And we can see that it's commensurate with the population,
but there's a lot of barriers
to entrepreneurial capability being released, uh,
understanding the regulatory environment, being connected
with business development agencies that provide support
to others, connecting with mainstream businesses
to leverage, uh, you know, the, the business opportunity
and leveraging what they can do for offshore business.
Mm-hmm. So there's a lot of evidence that shows that, uh,
ethnic, uh, communities of diaspora community,
their connections with offshore markets, their knowledge
of regulatory environments that are unfamiliar
to New Zealand businesses
and so on, can be enormously beneficial
to New Zealand's economy.
So that's a second area I think that we would support.
Uh, we see the kind of, uh, vicious
or virtuous cycle between social cohesion
and economic empowerment.
Each supports the other one. Yes.
Thank you. So, a brief supplementary on that, just, uh,
in terms of your resources
and thinking about how to deploy the most effectively, how,
how much do you work with, um, say, you know, uh,
local councils, for example,
and some of the resources they have?
I mean, I'm aware of, you know, Queensland LAC Council,
for example, does a lot of work around social cohesion with,
um, you know, very large number of different,
different communities, gorgeous council supports,
so big multicultural, um, you know,
events and things like that.
And I know this is replicated across the country. Yes.
How, how much do you work in with, with them?
Um, I think we could be doing more in that space.
Um, we do work with our, our councils
where we are having regional, for example.
So, uh, last year we, we fronted the committee
and explained that because of our reduced baseline,
we're gonna have to operate differently
working in the regions.
So when we work in the regions, uh,
that means we hold our forum with communities, with council,
with, you know, the, uh, official from different agencies
to address issues that that community has raised
as important, uh, to us.
So in those situations, we work with council.
Um, I wish we could work
with every council more collaboratively
and dovetail what we do with what they do.
It is challenging with the limited resources we've got,
but we do our best in the way I just described. Thank you.
Stop on there. Oh, would it be fair to say that you used
to have staff in the regions who would've undertaken
that work and that you have now lost them all?
Uh, we do not have regional staff in
the way we used to in the past.
Uh, so what we do, we have one staff in Dunedin,
but we don't have the staff that were in New Plymouth
and, you know, and so on.
Uh, what we've tried to do is
to hold regional forums the way I described, uh,
where the staff from the center go
to the community there to work with them.
Jamie, Uh, thank you.
Just firstly, thank you for the work
that you do in our community.
So my question is probably some of the, the really good work
around the ethnic communities development fund,
and I, I was just wondering how
that's evolved in the last four
and a half years, which you did talk about, uh,
the pressures of $13 billion worth of applications.
Yes. And $4.2 million that you got out the door.
But how, how do you actually, um,
'cause the, the, the ministry spent roughly
about $18 million.
How, how do you come to that percentage
or that figure of 4.2 million?
How, how can you work out whether
that's the best spend of the money?
So can you talk a little bit how that's evolving
and the pressures around those applications?
Certainly. So the, uh, the fund itself,
the $4.2 million was a part
of our appropriation was determined by government
to be administered to communities.
Um, it's, uh, it's the 4.2, uh,
million has remained static over the past few years.
Uh, the demand has increased quite radically.
I think it was 12, then 17. And this year it's been 30.
Um, of course, with that fund, administratively,
each application has to be assessed independently
by an advisor and then assessed
by the ethnic advisory panel, a group of committee leaders
who look at it and make a recommendation to ministry.
Uh, we, whether it's, you know, a hundred applications
or a thousand, we have to apply the same rigor
to the assessment for each.
So that's been a little bit of a pressure on us.
Uh, nevertheless, we talk
to communities about the applications.
We manage the expectation.
So sometimes people apply for $20,000 for a proposal.
We tell 'em we can only give you five.
Have you thought of getting it from other places as well?
The card collaboration is beneficial to you.
We also try to encourage them to do joint activities.
So instead of having five Deval events in a city,
can you have just maybe one, you know, uh,
and include, um, a broader range
of communities into the tent.
Uh, so we do those sorts of things.
Um, we assess the funding that goes to each
of the four priorities,
and we can see there's a heavy emphasis on cultural events.
Now, those things, they are valuable
because they build social cohesion on the ground.
Uh, however, we'd like
to see a little bit more balance across,
across the other priorities as well.
Uh, so, you know, everyone's got, like, stuff they're doing
that is funded by government, not just festivals.
Uh, so that's something we are working on.
We have workshops with the community to explain, um, how
to apply, um, what the limitations are.
The fact they have to report back an account
for the spending that's been made.
And we get a lot of positive feedback about the,
even the minuscule funding that people get.
Uh, sometimes people are skeptical about $3,000
for Chinese New Year
and Wang, like what difference does it make?
But when officials and ministers go out into the, the,
the community, they hear what a big difference
that little bit of money can make to those communities.
Thank you, Lawrence.
Thank you Chair. Uh, I'm gonna ask,
I I got two questions' gonna be really quick as well.
I'm glad I'm harder to hear that you also wanted
to tackle some of the more serious
and deep rooted issues that's facing ethnic communities.
So this ties two of your priorities priority three in terms
of economic outcomes.
You mentioned a lot about businesses,
but I don't hear a lot in terms of employment.
Mm-hmm. So one of the things I want to check with you is
I can help count the number
of ethnic community chief executive in the public service
who are ethnic mm-hmm.
From the communities on one hand. Yes. Mm-hmm.
The tier one to three managers is no more than 2%. Mm-hmm.
So what you're saying here, ethnic communities graduate
program, the solid representation in the
lower tier is not the issue.
The issue the top, top tier that's right.
There are fewer than 4% of judges who are Asian.
They are fewer than 5% of principles who are Asian.
What's your advice on how to address the issue
that even though ethnic committees has been here
for centuries, we're not seeing people at
that higher level being my first question.
Second question is, you mentioned in terms of the issues
with suicide rate, how, what's your work
with relevant agencies on ensuring
that there's visibilities from a mental health perspective,
from the fact that there's not simply because of the data,
but the unreported incidents of the domestic
and sexual violence, the fact that we're seeing
46.3%
of our Asian parents reporting their child gets bullied at
school, that's one in two.
Mm-hmm. We're also seeing, you know, record levels of like,
just, just in terms of that kind of stuff
that we're not really seeing the,
the visibility then when people access service,
it's also culturally inappropriate. Yeah.
Um, I'll do my best to answer that question.
Uh, within the limited resources,
the minister's got 60 people.
Hmm. So we have to be very sharp about
what can our contribution be.
So, for example, trying to reach out
to the community ourselves
to alleviate bullying is almost
impossible with the staff we've got.
Yeah. So we, we rely on other people to do it.
So one of the things we did was we worked
with the Education Review Office
to highlight the anecdotal information
that people are saying they're being bullied.
So the Education Review Office looked at this commissioner
piece of research and found
that actually there is bullying in
schools, the numbers are clear.
Mm-hmm. So we, we put sunlight on data that makes people go,
we've gotta do something about this.
But we ourselves do not have the heft of
actually reaching in to do something literally ourselves.
Uh, so that's one thing.
Uh, now I think you asked, the other question was around,
um, people in the high level, you know, um,
we've always believed
that merit-based appointments will
automatically lead to diversity.
So if you employ properly without cognitive biases,
automatically you will have more diversity in your,
in your cohort of people you're employing.
So in our view, uh, there needs
to be cognitive bias pro the,
the cognitive bias built into processes needs a sharp look
at, and people need to be clear if they are doing it
and measure what they're,
what they're seeing literally in terms of the, you know,
the d different communities on their boards
or, uh, who they're employing and so on.
Um, we also, of course, highlight the benefits of doing so.
There's a abundance of research on diversity
and on, on boards
or, you know, you know, top tier people, executive boards
and so on, that, that actually generates higher profits, um,
better customer service, better reach into markets, a range
of other benefits that people need to be aware of. Yeah.
So my question is about the, um,
ethnic communities graduate program.
So in your annual report, you state that in March, 2025,
after yielding 53 graduates, um, you concluded
that it was, um, it was time to disestablish
or to stop this particular program.
Um, because you've achieved the objective
of representation.
However, this is kind of, um, in line with, um,
what Lawrence has just been asking.
Isn't it true that Asia New Zealanders make up just over 17%
of the working age population and of 16%
or so in the public service, but there's only about 3%
or so in leadership, uh, positions across the sector?
So then how can you claim that we've achieved representation
adequately by ethnic communities, given
that in senior leadership roles?
We don't have the numbers yet. Yeah.
We don't have merit. Yes.
I think what we picked out when we looked at analyzing the
data, the public service, uh, commission, uh,
generates on the workforce of the public service is at the
graduate level, the numbers are very good,
almost representing the population base in some areas
exceeding, like the Mila community exceeds.
However, there seems to be a, a glass ceiling if you like.
Mm-hmm. Some people call it a bamboo ceiling in the middle
of somewhere where people cannot go beyond.
So the Public Service Commission runs a program called
papamu, which is about looking at
diversity and the public service.
The ministry myself sits on the Papa Panami,
uh, uh, cece's cohort.
And the advice we give to constantly measure the numbers
of people and the senior levels of public service
to make sure their career development opportunities
that cognitively bias processes are scrutinized carefully
to make sure that, you know, we are employing on married
and allowing, there's huge amounts
of very meritorious people in our ethnic communities.
They just need a chance to ascend.
So that's the kind of, um,
input we have into solving that problem. Yeah.
But supplementary on that, the public services own data
shows that Asian representation
and senior leadership is actually growing really slowly.
Yes. And requires deliberate effort.
Even your own ethnic evidence report
that you launched last year, um, stated that there are
so many barriers for ethnic communities actually
to get into the public service, let alone actually to rise,
um, above and, you know, become mm-hmm.
Senior leaders. So are you claiming
that your own research is wrong?
That we now are at adequate representation
and that there is no need for this, um,
graduate program? Is that what you're actually
Saying? Um,
I think what I am seeing is the evidence tells us
that the entry level
that people are employing diverse people from their
community is reflected in the data.
But as they ascend up level, you know, from level four,
five, level three tier, you know, senior managers, that's
where the diversity kind of stocks.
So the recruitment processes at that level might need, need
to be looked at, not so much the ones at the entry level.
Uh, we, we will have to end it there.
But thank you very much manifesting session.
And thank you for everything you do
for our communities are Thank you, chair.
Incredibly valuable part of, uh,
fabric in New Zealand society. Thank
You. Thank you so much. Thank.